# Project-3-Group-1

# Project title: NutriVis – Visualising Nutritional Profiles of Foods

## Overview

Purpose:
Planning and Research:
Coding and Design:
Explore visualisation tools:
Output(including the live static dashboard):

This project attempts to provide a platform for users to check the nutritional profiles of foods. At the planning stage, we epxlored the sources of data and inspected the webpages regarding wellbeing and fitness, among others. With respect to coding and design, we attempt to code as succinctly as possible and follow a logic from broader categories to specific foods for visualisations. Apart from utilising the visualisation tools covered in the classes, we explored other visualisation tools and used two extra libraries for visualisations that are not covered in the class. We extracted data, in Excel format originally, and performed cleaning tasks, including extracting, transforming, and loading, to eventually finalise the sample to be used for the visualisations. This README outlines the project structure, setup instructions, and usage guidance.

## Project Structure

-   `Project3Group1.ipynb`: Jupyter Notebook containing the codings and providing the visualisations.
-   `static\js`: The file "dataa.js" containing the data for 700 final sample and the file app.js 
                  containing the coding for the dashboard.
-   `Resources/`: Folder containing the original Excel data files and exported CSV and JSON files:
    -   `ABBREV.xlsx`: Original data downloaded from data.world (sourced from U.S. Department of 
                       Agriculture (USDA)).
    -   `original.csv`: The csv file converted from the original excel file ABBREV.xlsx.
    -   `origianl.json`: The json file converted from the original excel file ABBREV.xlsx.
    -   `food_label_final.csv`: The csv file converted from the DataFrame of the final sample for 
                        visualisations.
    -   `food_label_final.json`: The json file converted from the DataFrame of the final sample for 
                        visualisations.
    -   `food.jpg`: An image used to decorate the dashboard.
-   `Images/`: Folder containing screenshots of:
    -   `average nutrition values by category`: the first visualisation generated.
    -   `a comparison of two categories`: the second visualisation from comparing two categories.
    -   `updated Nutrients density heatmap`: the third visualisation created using dokeh tools.
    -   `the dashboard image`: an image of the dashboard presenting interactive visualisations. 
    -   `an example of food label gnerated on the dashboard`: an image of food label generated on the 
                             dashboard.
    -   `gauge chart 1`: the gauge chart for satuated_fat upon a selection of food on the dashboard.
    -   `gauge chart 2`: the gauge chart for satuated_fat upon a selection of food on the dashboard.


## Before You Begin

-   Check if you are able to import all the dependencies in the file "Project3Group1.ipynb"
-   Install the required libraries if needed.

## Setup

1.  Clone this repository to your local machine.
2.  Navigate to the cloned directory.
3.  Ensure the `Resources` folder contains the original excel file "ABBREV.xlsx".
4.  Open the `Project3Group1.ipynb` Jupyter Notebook in Jupyter Lab or Visual Studio Code.
5.  Follow the steps to run the codes.

## MongoDB Database Setup

1.  Open a terminal and navigate to the Resources folder where the original and exported files are located.
2.  copy and paste the following codes to load the files to MongoDB when the files are generated:
#'mongoimport --type json -d food -c original --drop --jsonArray original.json'
#'mongoimport --type json -d food -c food_label_final --drop --jsonArray food_label_final.json'

## Using the Project

-   The project is divided into two parts:
    -   **One-way Visualisation**: Follow the steps in the file "Project3Group1.ipynb".
    -   **Interactive Visualisation on the Dashboard**: Open the index.html and select foods from the 
                                   dropdown menu.

## Data ethics considered

During the process of working on the project, we endeavour to follow the rules, including the rules for privacy and ethical coding when extracting data, exploring codes for new visiualisation tools. All the resources used are acknowledged and referenced below.


## Authors

- Steph Adey
- Sonal Bhosle
- Liwei Jiang
- Aryan Linga

## References

- University of Adelaide. (2023). Module 14 contents in particular.
https://bootcampspot.instructure.com/courses/4781/pages/14-interactive-web-visualisations?module_item_id=1163045
- Visualisation Gallery-boheh. Retrieved from (https://docs.bokeh.org/en/latest/docs/gallery.html)
- How to Guides using ipywidgets interact tools. Retrieve from (https://ipywidgets.readthedocs.io/en/latest/examples/Using%20Interact.html)


**Data**
- Data for this dataset was generated by edX Boot Camps LLC, and is intended for educational purposes only.
- Data for Food nutritional values, retrieved from data.world (https://data.world/login?next=%2Fawram%2Ffood-nutritional-values%2Fworkspace%2Ffile%3Ffilename%3DABBREV.xlsx)
- U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) (https://www.ars.usda.gov/northeast-area/beltsville-md-bhnrc/beltsville-human-nutrition-research-center/methods-and-application-of-food-composition-laboratory/)


